[Music]
introduction origins and methodology in
early 1986 Senator John Kerry began a
staff investigation of allegations that
elements of the supply network
supporting the Nicaraguan Contras were
linked with drug traffickers in April
1986 Senator Kerry took information he
had developed to the chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee Richard
Lugar who agreed to conduct a staff
inquiry into those allegations in
response to a request by Senator Kerry
senator lugar scheduled a closed session
of the Committee on Foreign Relations on
June 25th 1986 to discuss these
allegations and to determine whether or
not adequate attention and priority was
being given to international narcotics
law enforcement efforts generally
Senator Kerry was concerned that because
of the preoccupation with other foreign
policy priorities relating to several
nations the United States was not
dealing adequately with the growing
global drug problem at that meeting
Senator Kerry raised questions as to the
willingness of the administration to
investigate allegations of drug
trafficking involving the Contras supply
network and the apparent reluctance to
deal with Bahamian drug corruption for
reasons of national security
Senator Kerry noted that witnesses who
had brought this information to his
attention had also allegations of drug
related corruption concerning Nicaraguan
officials in response the committee at
the direction of the then Chairman
Senator Richard Lugar decided that an
investigation of drug allegations
relating to the war in Nicaragua should
be undertaken in February 1987 at the
direction of chairman Claiborne Pell the
committee continued its investigative
efforts expanding the focus to include
the impact of drug trafficking from the
Caribbean and Central and South America
on u.s. foreign policy interests in
April the responsibility for the
investigation was given to the
Subcommittee on terrorism narcotics and
international operations
chaired by Senator Kerry with Senator
McConnell serving as the ranking member
the subcommittee conducted 14 days of
open hearings nine executive sessions
and received testimony from 27 witnesses
in addition the staff deposed an
additional 20 witnesses 30 subpoenas
were issued many calling for the
production of extensive documentation
the committee sought and received
documents from a large number of
government agencies including the Drug
Enforcement Administration the Federal
Bureau of Investigation the Department
of Defense the Department of the army
the Central Intelligence Agency the
Defense Intelligence Agency the US
Customs Service the Department of State
the Department of the Treasury the
overseas Private Investment Corporation
and the National Security Council in
addition the full foreign relation
committee conducted extensive
questioning of officials on the global
narcotics problem in 1987 and 1988 in
response to the annual international
Narcotics Control strategy report that
report is an annual submission to the
Congress mandated by the anti-drug Abuse
Act of 1986 the law requires the
President to certify that major illicit
drug producing country or a major drug
transit country cooperated fully with
the United States in the previous year
or took adequate steps on its own with
respect to illicit drug production
trafficking and money laundering one
hearing was conducted jointly by the
Subcommittee on terrorism narcotics and
international operations and the
Subcommittee on international economic
policy in preparation for the hearings
the staff interviewed dozens of people
in and out of government many of these
interviews were kept confidential to
ensure candid discussions the
subcommittee traveled to Costa Rica
where depositions were taken and
interviews conducted with present and
former government officials by agreement
with chairman Daniel Inouye
the Senate Select Committee on secret
military assistance to Iran and the
Nicaraguan opposition the staff assigned
to the investigation were cleared to
review the documents provided to the
Select Committee in the course of its
investigation the committee staff
reviewed thousands of select committees
documents including the classified
version of notebooks maintained by
Oliver North during the period he was at
the National Security Council the North
Diaries a number of witnesses and
prospective witnesses were convicted
felons having been imprisoned for
narcotics related offenses the
subcommittee made use of these witnesses
in accordance with the practice of
federal and state prosecutors who
routinely rely on convicts as witnesses
in criminal trials because they are the
ones with the most intimate knowledge of
the criminal activity all witnesses who
appeared before the subcommittee did so
under oath and the threat of prosecution
for perjury the subcommittee did not and
could not offer reduced sentences in
exchange for testimony before using the
testimony of convicted felons in a
public session the subcommittee staff
attempted to corroborate the witnesses
stories many of the witnesses were
considered sufficiently credible to have
been used by prosecutors and grand jury
investigations and trials including the
major federal narcotics prosecutions of
general Noriega Medellin Cartel leader
Carlos letter and officials in Haiti and
the Bahamas gaining access to convicted
felons and making arrangements to have
them testify required the cooperation of
the Department of Justice and numerous
US attorneys in some cases the
cooperation was excellent while in
others the subcommittee confronted one
difficulty after another which delayed
the investigation and complicated the
presentation of testimony and public
hearings as this report is read it
should be kept in mind that the purpose
of the investigation was to identify the
nature of the threat posed by
international drug trafficking and the
adequacy of the US government response
to the three
at the subcommittee was interested in
the larger policy questions and was not
seeking to develop specific cases
against individuals the scope of the
threat when the Senate Committee on
Foreign Relations began its
investigation two years ago and to drug
trafficking law enforcement and foreign
policy this issue is widely viewed as
being primarily a law enforcement
problem while public debate over the
drug problem focused on improving
international and domestic law
enforcement efforts the size capability
and activities of the cartels were
rapidly expanding there are probably few
issues which have caused greater strains
in our relations with other nations
particularly with our Latin American
neighbors than that of international
drug trafficking the problem has given
rise to a growing frustration in the
Congress over the seeming inability of
many nations in the hemisphere to
eliminate or kertel the production or
transshipment of cocaine and marijuana
destined for marketing in the United
States on the other hand there are valid
concerns on the part of our Latin
American allies that were it not for the
demand problem in the United States the
drug issue would be of more manageable
proportions after two years of
investigation carried out under the
auspices of the Subcommittee on
narcotics terrorism and international
operations it is apparent that the
United States is facing a significant
national security problem it is a
problem serious enough for us to
re-examine our perception as to what
constitutes national security threats to
ourselves and our friends around the
world and the post-world War two ERA the
national security focus of the United
States was framed by our predominant
concern with east-west competition
around the globe this concern with
Marxist expansionism in general and
Soviet expansionism in particular led us
to take a series of extraordinary steps
to respond to the threat these steps
ranged from
implementing the Marshall Plan for
Western Europe to establishing NATO and
other military alliances around the
world to fighting conventional wars in
both Korea and Vietnam as the United
States enters the decade of the 1990s it
is clear that the operations of the
international drug organizations also
constitute a threat of serious national
security dimensions in Latin America
these organizations known as cartels
have become a powerful supranational
political force with economic resources
of a magnitude to shape developments in
Central and South America and throughout
the Caribbean the most powerful of the
Latin American drug cartels are located
in Colombia the Colombian cartels
constitute an international underworld
so extensive so wealthy and so powerful
that today they operate virtually
unchallenged they have organized
themselves into elaborate conglomerates
for the purposes of growing harvesting
processing transporting selling and
repatriating their profits from cocaine
and marijuana men like Pablo Escobar
Jorge Ochoa Jaime gyote lara and carlos
lehder formed oceans spanning mafia-like
organizations capable of very large and
very complex undertakings they have
built coca processing centers in the
nearly impenetrable rainforests of the
Amazon River Basin in Colombia factory
complexes capable in a week's time of
converting tons of coca paste flown in
from Peru and Bolivia and to crystalline
cocaine the finished product is then
flown across the Caribbean and Central
America to the United States it is
estimated that there are five dollars of
profit for each dollar that cartels
invest in the farm-to-market process the
magnitude of the profits associated with
the international drug trade is
staggering the June 20th 1988 edition of
Fortune magazine reported that the
global drug trade may run up to 500
billion dollars a year
more than twice the value of all US
currency in circulation as witness after
witness stressed to the subcommittee the
cartels are driven by financial rather
than ideological motives they are
willing to do business with anyone as
long as it helps further their narcotics
interests their power threatens to
undermine regional stability and they
have already demonstrated the capacity
to destabilize democratic governments
these developments are deeply in EM
achill to the national security
interests of the United States domestic
effects of international drug
trafficking to appreciate the degree to
which the international drug traffickers
have affected the lives of the American
people one needs only to analyze the
statistics polls show that about 50
percent of all Americans say they have
had a relative or close friend who has
had a problem with illegal drugs and one
out of every three says that illicit
drugs can be purchased within a mile of
their home in addition sixty percent of
all illegal drugs produced in the world
are consumed here in the United States
some 20 million Americans smoked
marijuana
nearly six million regularly used
cocaine and half a million are addicted
to heroin the National Institute for
drug abuse reports that cocaine related
hospital emergencies have risen nearly
600 percent between 1983 and 1987
cocaine related deaths have risen from
under 400 in 1983 to nearly 1400 in 1987
the last year for which statistics are
available it is estimated that 70% of
all violent crime in the United States
is drug-related the street price for a
kilo of cocaine in the United States has
plummeted from $60,000 in 1980 to
approximately nine thousand dollars a
kilo today this has put cocaine within
the means of the vast majority of
Americans
and shows how ineffective interdiction
efforts have been between 1982 and 1985
the amount of cocaine seized coming into
the United States more than doubled from
31 metric tons 270 2.3 metric tons the
problem has reached such crisis
proportions that various federal
agencies involved in the war on drugs
cannot come up with a reasonable
estimate as to how much cocaine reaches
the streets of our country today it is
estimated that cocaine usage among the
workforce costs the United States 100
billion dollars a year in lost
productivity the American market for
drugs produces annual revenues of well
over 100 billion dollars at retail
prices this is twice what US consumers
spend for oil each year effects on
foreign countries it is not only the
people of the United States who are
victimized by the operations of the
cartels the cartels utilizing corruption
and violence have literally bought
governments and destabilized others in
Colombia the cocaine lords have co-opted
an entire nation and its government
beginning in 1984 efforts by the
Colombian government to crack down and
dismantle the cartels since 1984 have
led to unprecedented violence in the
past two years fifty-seven judges
including half of the Supreme Court and
two cabinet officials have been
assassinated a year ago Colombia's
Attorney General was murdered by cartel
assassins while Colombia's democracy has
been threatened Panama's has been stolen
the relationship established in the
1970s between drug traffickers and a
little-known officer in the Panamanian
intelligence Manuel Antonio Noriega has
grown as Noriega power has increased as
a result panama has become a safe haven
and critical base of operations for the
cartels
particularly as a money-laundering
center the trend toward democratization
was reversed in Panama and Noriega now
presides over the hemispheres first
narco kleptocracy the corrupting
influence of the cartels has now been
felt throughout Latin America and the
Caribbean the subcommittee received
testimony that remote islands in the
Bahamas chain could be rented for use as
transit sites for cocaine and marijuana
destined for the United States despite
the expenditure of significant sums of
money devoted to joint interdiction
efforts with the government of the
Bahamas the International Narcotics
Control strategy report of March 1988
estimated that 60% of the cocaine and
50% of the marijuana coming into the
United States continued to transit that
country
US officials attribute to the problem to
the continuation of drug-related
corruption at all levels of government
in 1987 the Colombian cartels
established a major and secure base of
operations in Haiti turning that country
into another significant transit point
for cocaine coming into the United
States
the cartels bought protection from the
upper ranks of the Haitian military
which in turn established a distribution
network in the United States this
network is characterized by a high level
of violence associated with its
operations
the cartels now pose a serious threat to
Costa Rica having established themselves
in the northern war zones used by the
Nicaraguan insurgents Costa Rica the
most free stable and longest standing
democracy in the region continues to be
ill-equipped to deal with this threat
despite to the fact that it has the
toughest drug laws in all of Latin
America in Peru there are reports that
drug money funds the Sendero Luminoso x'
efforts to topple the democratically
elected government of that country in
bolivia democratically elected
governments face an almost
insurmountable task and destroying coca
production
and cocaine labs operating with near
impunity in that nation they have
corrupted local officials including
police and military in Mexico and there
are allegations that the corruption has
spread to higher level officials this
development may be making an already
serious situation worse as Mexico
continues to remain a major producer of
opium poppy and cannabis and continues
to be a primary source of heroin and
marijuana entering the United States
elements of the military in Honduras are
involved in drug-related corruption
undermining the fledgling attempts to
establish a truly democratic civilian
based government in that country because
of the pervasive influence of the
Honduran military on every aspect of
life in that country there is concern
that the experience in Panama could be
replicated in Honduras in Paraguay drug
corruption within the military also has
been a serious problem for some time
despite the fact that Latin America's
longest standing dictator General
Alfredo Stroessner
was ousted recently in a military coup
US Drug Enforcement officials are
concerned that the narcotics trade
through Paraguay will continue unabated
as the State Department has acknowledged
there are quote frequent allegations
that Paraguay and officials are involved
in narcotics trafficking end quote
general andreas rodriguez the mastermind
of the coup has been linked in press
reports as a major figure in the drug
trade the national security implications
of the drug trade the cartels want
stable governments in Latin America but
weak institutions which they can control
they want a climate in which they can do
business freely without government
interference in many countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean they have
succeeded in accomplishing this goal in
many instances the cartels have allied
themselves with organizations which are
engaged in illicit movements of arms and
ammunition
for whatever purpose or whatever
ideology on the right or the left
general Paul Gorman in his testimony
before the subcommittee described the
problem very succinctly when he observed
quote if you want to move arms or
munitions in Latin America the
established networks are owned by the
cartels it has lent itself to the
purposes of terrorists of saboteurs of
spies of insurgents and of subversives
end quote such alliances have been
established with left-wing insurgent
groups such as m-19 in Colombia and the
Sendero Luminoso in Peru general Noriega
and Panama has been a major figure in
the clandestine arms trade selling
weapons to anyone or group who would buy
them including the FMLN and El Salvador
as the subcommittee found even the
Nicaraguan Contras fighting to overthrow
the Sandinistas were not immune from
exploitation by narcotics traffickers if
allowed to continue unchallenged the
operations of the cartels will have even
more serious implications for US foreign
policy interests throughout the
hemisphere if there has been one area of
foreign policy in which the Congress and
the Reagan administration found
agreement during the last eight years
it was the desirability of promoting and
reinforcing the democratization process
which has swept Latin America over the
course of the last decade this consensus
was achieved despite the fractious
debate over aid to the Contras other
than the international debt issue the
operations of the drug cartels posed the
most serious threat to the consolidation
of democracy throughout Latin America
the basic foundation upon which
democracy rests is respect for the rule
of law and the guarantees it provides
for individual rights and liberties the
cartels respect neither law nor the
rights of individuals nor the
institutions created to uphold the
former and guarantee the latter
they have demonstrated the ruthless
capability to undermine and destroy any
institution or individual standing in
their way
unfortunately the international
narcotics trade historically has been
relegated to the back waters of US
foreign policy concerns it was not until
recent years when domestic cocaine usage
reached epidemic proportions and
drug-related violence on the streets of
the United States reached crisis levels
that serious attention has been paid to
this problem
however the issue is still not given
attention commensurate with the
seriousness of the problem within most
agencies of the federal government to
date the US has been unable to achieve
effective coordination regarding the
problem the Congress mandated the
creation of a new position the National
Director of narcotics policy and
formerly known as the drug czar in
response to this concern the drug czar
will need to focus attention on ensuring
that the u.s. develops a strategy and
allocates the resources necessary to
wage effectively a war on drugs synopsis
of the report in preparing this report
the subcommittee has attempted to define
the nature of the problems associated
with the operations of the cocaine
cartels
there are individual chapters devoted to
Colombia Panama the Bahamas Haiti
Honduras and Cuba and Nicaragua the
subcommittee had neither the time nor
the resources to address other major
problem countries such as Mexico
Paraguay Peru and Bolivia or the
emerging problems in Brazil nevertheless
the problems and the patterns of
corruption are similar in these
countries as to those addressed by the
subcommittee a separate chapter is
devoted to the allegations of
involvement of drug traffickers with the
Contra movement and their supply
operations there is also a separate
chapter devoted to the issue of money
laundering which is the key to the
effective operations of the car
tells the phenomenal profit associated
with the narcotics trade is the
foundation upon which the cartels power
is based the subcommittee members
believe that a concerted attack on the
cartels money laundering operations may
be one of the most effective means to
strike at their most vulnerable point a
separate chapter is devoted to an
examination of the conflicts between law
enforcement agencies and the foreign
policy and intelligence agencies of the
US government for example the DEA still
maintains that it is receiving
cooperation from Panama in US Drug
Enforcement efforts
yet william von Raab the Commissioner
for US Customs has testified before the
committee that by 1983 US agencies had
more than enough evidence of general
Noriega involvement in the narcotics
trade this according to von Raab
rendered any cooperation Panama was
giving the US and drug seizures and
arrests virtually meaningless the report
also includes appendices concerning the
notebooks maintained by Lieutenant
Colonel Oliver North and their relation
to the subcommittee investigation and on
allegations concerning interference by
government officials in the initial
stages of the subcommittee investigation
the members of the subcommittee are
hopeful that if nothing else this report
will stimulate significant debate and
reflection both within and outside our
government the stakes are very high for
us and for our friends throughout the
hemisphere this entails understanding
all the dimensions of the problem and
the events and circumstances that
contributed to the development of the
cartels after all violence and
corruption associated with the narcotics
trade is not just a problem from Latin
America and the Caribbean both seriously
affect the quality of life in the United
States as well open issue
subjects requiring further investigation
this report should be considered a first
step toward a fuller understanding of
the International scope of the narcotics
problem many issues arose during the
course of the investigation which could
not be pursued in the 100th Congress
because of the time and staff
limitations there are open issues and
questions which call for further study 1
the subcommittee investigations of
money-laundering allegations involving
the bank of credit and commerce
international should be completed
developing an effective strategy against
money laundering will require a more
complete understanding of the way drug
traffickers move hide and invest the
profits from the profits from their
illicit activities these subcommittee's
work thus far suggests that if the
banking system can be closed to drug
money and if assets owned by the drug
cartels can be seized large-scale
trafficking can be more easily
controlled two serious questions about
the adequacy of the Neutrality Act in
controlling the activities of
mercenaries and soldiers of fortune
arose during the hearings the
subcommittee should examine the problems
the Department of Justice has had using
the Act and consider its revision3 the
subcommittee has received allegations
that various factions in the Lebanese
civil war are supporting their efforts
with drug money and that they have
started to work with the Colombian
cartels these allegations require
thorough examination for the
subcommittee has received allegations
that heroin dealers used the war in
Afghanistan as cover for their
operations there are reports of guns for
drugs exchanges and significant drug
related corruption the 1988
international drug control strategy
report prepared by the State Department
obliquely acknowledged the problem
stating quote individual resistance
elements reportedly engaged
opium production and trafficking as a
source of income to provide staples for
populations under their control and to
fund weapons purchases end quote
further it has been alleged that weapons
for the resistance were diverted to the
international arms market five the March
1989 International Narcotics Control
strategy report again raised concerns
that drug-related corruption has
continued to undermine narcotics law
enforcement in Mexico the report
described the emergence in 1988 of quote
an increasing number of Colombian
traffickers within Mexico
involved primarily with facilitating the
transit shipment of cocaine to the
United States end quote
the level of drug-related corruption in
Mexico continues to be a priority
concern of the subcommittee while there
was neither the time nor the resources
to investigate thoroughly the situation
in Mexico this will be a continuing
focus of the subcommittee's work in the
future other pending business includes
the effort by the Foreign Relations
Committee to obtain access to an
unexpurgated version of Oliver North's
notebooks the notebooks contain numerous
references to the drug issue but could
not be deciphered because key sections
had been deleted by north and his
attorneys on April 6th 1989 those
notebooks were turned over by north to
the independent council in connection
with his trial when North waived his
Fifth Amendment rights and chose to
testify the subcommittee will continue
to seek to obtain those notebooks a
detailed discussion of the north
notebook problem has been included as an
appendix to this report
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you